welcome back we're going deep on cancer
research this time specifically um a
metabolic approach okay you sent over
some really fascinating stuff articles
and even an interview with uh with a
cancer researcher Dr Thomas cyre yeah so
let's dive in well it's a pretty timely
Deep dive for sure cancer statistics
they uh they paint a pretty Grim picture
nearly 2 million new cancer cases
diagnosed each year here in the US and
something like 1,700 people die from
cancer every day wow those are those are
huge numbers that's like what 70 people
every hour yeah it's a lot and they're
saying it's going to get even worse by
2050 that's right it really makes you
wonder why you know we've put so much
research so many resources into cancer
research but why haven't we made more
progress well that's the big question
isn't it makes you really question our
approach the dominant Theory the sematic
mutation Theory right it says that
cancer starts because of mutations in
the cell's DNA and this theory has
driven most of our research and
treatments like chemo radiation surgery
okay so that's the traditional view
cancer as a genetic disease but Dr C
freed he's offering um a different
perspective right this mitochondrial
metabolic Theory exactly yeah okay so to
get us all on the same page what are
mitochondria sure so think of
mitochondria as like the powerhouses of
your cells oh okay they're the energy
factories basically they're responsible
for producing the energy that your cells
need need to function and what Dr saf is
saying is that when these mitochondria
malfunction it changes how the cells
create energy they can't use oxygen as
efficiently so they revert to a less
efficient process called fermentation
fermentation so like how yeast makes
bread rise exactly he's suggesting that
cancer cells act like um like ancient
organisms kind of yeah it's an
interesting way to think about it like
those early life forms billions of years
ago when there wasn't much oxygen around
okay that's uh that's pretty wild what
kind of evidence is there for this that
seems like a huge shift from how we
normally think about cancer well there
is quite a bit actually one of Dr sa
Freed's key findings is a direct
connection between tumor growth and
blood sugar levels yeah basically higher
blood sugar equals faster tumor growth
that makes sense if you think about it
if the cells are relying on that uh yeah
that less efficient fermentation they
would need a lot of sugar to fuel that
growth exactly yeah it's like constantly
adding fuel to a fire right right but
it's not just about sugar and tumors
there's also research that challenges
the whole idea that DNA mutations are
the only cause really yeah they found
that even normal healthy tissues can
contain these driver mutations the ones
that are supposed to cause cancer but
they don't actually develop the disease
so you're saying you can have these
mutations but still be healthy that's
what the research suggests wow okay so
that kind of throws a wrench in the
traditional thinking it does and there's
this really fascinating experiment where
researchers they took the nucleus from a
cancer cell and transplanted it into a
healthy cell and surprisingly it didn't
cause any cancerous growth but then they
took a healthy nucleus and put it into a
cancer cell and guess what it became
cancerous oh wow so it wasn't the DNA
and the nucleus that was the problem it
was something else in the cell where the
mitochondria are exactly that experiment
really highlighted the cytoplasm and
mitochondria as being key to the whole
process Okay so if cancer is really a
metabolic issue then how do we approach
it differently well Dr C freed advocates
for what he calls metabolic therapy it
aims to cut off the fuel supply to the
cancer cells by restricting glucose
which comes mainly from carbs and
glutamine and amino acid those are the
two main fuels that drive cancer growth
so basically starving the cancer cells
in a way yes but you have to be
selective about it right the strategy is
to restrict those fuels while also
Shifting the body to using ketones
ketones yep cancer cells can't use those
efficiently ketones that's what the
ketogenic diet is all about right got it
interesting and this is where Dr C freed
connects his theory back to our
evolutionary past for most of human
history we were in a state of
nutritional ketosis because carbs were
scarce exactly so we're designed to run
on ketones ex and cancer cells can't use
them effectively so it gives us a way to
Target them without harming healthy
cells that's the idea that's really fast
fascinating so metabolic therapy is kind
of like recreating that ancient
metabolic State that's what Dr Saed
believes yeah where cancer was a lot
less common right this is starting to
sound like more than just a treatment
like a way of thinking about health and
prevention you're absolutely right
interesting Dr cafrey believes that
lifestyle changes that promote healthy
mitochondria they're not just about
treating cancer but potentially
preventing it in the first place okay
I'm hooked now what kind of Lifestyle
Changes are we talking about things like
regular exercise calorie restriction
intermittent fasting and as you
mentioned the ketogenic diet right all
of these things can help your
mitochondria function better it sounds
like a pretty big shift for a lot of
people it can be yeah but if it can help
reduce the risk of cancer it's worth
considering absolutely it's about taking
control of your metabolic Health okay
this is all very interesting in theory
but has this actually worked in real
life there's some really compelling case
studies yeah remember that article you
sing about the dog with a mass cell
tumor oh yeah the one whose owner um
stumbled upon Dr sa Freed's work that's
the one and decided to like try it out
what happened with that well the Vets
had given the dog a pretty Grim
prognosis they recommended chemo
radiation and surgery but the owner she
decided to try something different based
on Dr sa Freed's work right she
drastically cut the dog's calories
eliminated all processed food and
switched to a diet of raw chicken fish
oil and eggs wow basically a canine
ketogenic diet a total dietary overhaul
and what happened well the tumor
completely vanished yeah and the dog
lived to be 15 years old wow and it
eventually died from heart disease but
the cancer never came back that's
incredible it shows you the potential
obviously one case isn't definitive
proof or anything of course not but it's
pretty amazing it is and there's that
other case you
sent about uh Pablo Kelly from England
right yes Pablo Kelly me what was his
story so Pablo was diagnosed with
glioblastoma right which is a very
aggressive brain cancer and the doctors
gave him less than a year to live even
with traditional treatments oh wow yeah
it's a devastating diagnosis so what did
he do he um he also learned about Dr sa
Freed's work and he actually decided to
forgo the conventional treatments really
and try the metabolic approach wow
that's a uh that's a big decision it was
you got a lot of push back from doctors
and even as family I bet but he was
determined wow he adopted a strict
ketogenic diet restricted his calories
and took some supplements to Target
glutamine okay and what were the results
well 3 years later he went in for a
scan and the doctors were shocked Not
only was he still alive but the tumor
had shrunk really yeah enough to be
operable it was originally inoperable
exactly so they were able to surgically
remove it and he recovered okay he
recovered amazingly well and for several
years Pablo continued to manage his
metabolic Health he kept his glucose and
Ketone levels in a very specific range
and it worked it did for a while so this
metabolic therapy and the surgery gave
him years he wasn't supposed to have
exactly and here's the amazing part
Pablo actually ended up having three
separate surgeries to remove more of the
tumor all without any chemo or radiation
that's Ah that's incredible it is so
sadly he eventually passed away from the
cancer actually no about 10 years after
his diagnosis he passed away from
complications from his third surgery oh
wow it was a cerebral hemorrhage
completely unrelated to the cancer
itself so he lived for a decade with the
gasta which usually kills people within
a year or two I know it's remarkable and
he died from a surgical complication not
the cancer that really speaks volumes
about this approach it really does it
shows that cancer can be managed and
people can live longer healthier lives
if we understand its metabolic
underpinnings right and it seems like Dr
safreed isn't saying that conventional
treatments are bad like surgery chemo
radiation no not at all but that they
can work better when combined with
metabolic therapy exactly he
acknowledges that they can be effective
especially with localized tumors but he
believes that metabolic therapy can make
them even more effective okay I'm
curious how so well by weakening the
cancer cells and cutting off their fuel
supply metabolic therapy can make them
more vulnerable to traditional
treatments meaning you could potentially
use lower doses of chemo or radiation
leading to fewer side effects makes
sense kind of like softening up the
enemy before the main attack that's a
good way to put it and you were saying
something about combining metabolic
therapy with hyperbaric oxygen therapy
yes that's right remind me what is that
it's where you breathe cure oxygen in a
pressurized chamber right studies in
mice have shown that combining that
therapy with a key enic diet it can
significantly increase survival times
wait so giving them more oxygen helps I
thought oxygen was essential for life it
is but that's where the ketogenic diet
comes in remember how we talked about
cancer cells not being able to use
ketones efficiently right right well it
turns out that ketones also protect
healthy cells from damage from
um from what are called reactive oxygen
species which are produced when our
bodies use oxygen okay so the ketogenic
diet acts as a shield for the healthy
cells gotcha and then the hyperbaric
oxygen therapy floods the body with
oxygen including the cancer cells right
which are already weakened by the lack
of glucose and glutamine so they're much
more susceptible to the damaging effects
of the oxygen interesting so you're
basically creating a hostile environment
that the healthy cells can tolerate but
the cancer cells can't exactly wow it
really highlights how understanding the
metabolic side of cancer can lead to new
treatments that's amazing so how can
people assess their own own metabolic
health is there a way to know if you're
in a state that's uh unfavorable for
cancer growth yes there is Dr safreed
and his team developed the glucose
Ketone index okay or gki it's a way to
measure your metabolic health and how
does that work well you measure your
blood glucose and Ketone levels and then
you divide the glucose by the Ketone
value okay that number is your gki and
what's a healthy gki a gki of 2.0 or
below is considered to be in the
Paleolithic Zone the Paleolithic Zone
meaning your metabolism is functioning
similar to our ancestors fascinating so
by measuring your gki you can see if
your diet and lifestyle are creating an
environment where cancer cells might
struggle exactly it gives you a way to
Monitor and manage your own health wow
that's really empowering it is it's not
just about blindly following doctor's
orders it's about understanding the
science and making your own choices
exactly and that's a message that Dr
safreed is very passionate about he
believes that metabolic therapy puts the
responsibility for health back on the
individual that makes sense but let's be
realistic there are a lot of challenges
with this like societal Temptations are
everywhere and most doctors haven't even
heard of metabolic therapy yeah those
are definitely challenges it's hard to
resist all the processed food and sugary
drinks out there yeah and you're right a
lot of doctors aren't familiar with this
approach so there could be push back
from family members who don't understand
it right and trying to convince a doctor
who set in in the traditional view I
imagine that could be really frustrating
it can be yeah Dr safre talks about how
frustrating it is that the medical
community is so slow to change Paradigm
shifts are always difficult especially
when they challenge long-held beliefs
and practices it's like that story he
told about the capern revolution it took
centuries for people to accept that the
Earth revolves around the Sun even
though the evidence was clear exactly we
may be seeing a similar thing with the
metabolic theory of cancer it's a
radical departure from the norm it is
it'll take time for it to catch on it
will but even though there are
challenges there's also a lot of Hope
the research supporting metabolic
therapy is growing and we have these
amazing case studies like Pablo Kelly's
yeah seems like we could be on the verge
of a major shift in how we understand
and treat cancer I think so too and
what's really encouraging is that this
approach yeah it gives people the power
to take control of their own health and
potentially reduce their risk of this
horrible disease
it's about moving beyond fear and
helplessness exactly and embracing a
proactive science-based approach love
the prevention and treatment yes this
has been an incredible Deep dive so far
I'm already looking at cancer in a whole
new light but before we move on I have
one more
question if mitochondrial dysfunction is
at the root of it all and our modern
diet and lifestyle contribute to that
dysfunction are we essentially making
cancer inevitable that's a great
question and one that we'll definitely
explore further further in the next part
of our Deep dive we'll talk about the
implications of our modern world on
mitochondrial health and what we can do
to mitigate the risks okay sounds good
stay tuned all right yeah that's a
really important Point our modern world
you know with all the processed food and
the sedentary lifestyle and all the
environmental toxins it's definitely
creating an environment where
mitochondria don't Thrive so we're
practically setting ourselves up for
cancer by the way we live well I would
say it's that simple not everyone who
lives a modern lifestyle is going to get
cancer but the connection is there you
have to remember that mitochondria are
ancient organisms they evolved in an
environment that was very different from
ours today they thrive on oxygen
movement and real Whole Foods and our
modern lifestyle is pretty much the
opposite of all that yeah pretty much
we're constantly bombarded with sugar we
sit for hours on end and we're exposed
to a ton of chemicals in our food water
even the air right and all that can
damage our mitochondria make them less
efficient and more likely to revert to
that fermentation process that fuels
cancer growth so we're kind of pushing
them to their Breaking Point that's a
good way to put it and it's not just
about cancer either mitochondrial
dysfunction is linked to a whole bunch
of chronic diseases heart disease
diabetes Alzheimer's even aging so it's
about more than just living longer it's
about living healthier exactly if we can
support our mitochondria we can reduce
our risk for all sort sorts of health
problem exactly and it doesn't have to
be about deprivation it's about making
choices that align with how our bodies
were designed to function so
like choosing Whole Foods over processed
foods Right Moving our bodies regularly
getting enough sleep it's all the stuff
our grandparents probably told us pretty
much and minimizing exposure to toxins
as much as possible it's about
recognizing that our bodies are complex
systems that have evolved over millions
of years we need to treat them with
respect so in a way it's about getting
back to basics yeah I think that's a
good way to look at it eating real food
moving our bodies connecting with nature
it sounds simple but in today's world
it's almost revolutionary it is kind of
I love that idea but I got to admit this
all feels a bit overwhelming there's so
much information out there it's hard to
know where to start I get it remember
small changes can make a big difference
you don't have to overhaul your entire
life overnight okay that's good to hear
start with something manageable so it's
one simple thing people can do to start
supporting their mitochondria and maybe
reduce the risk of cancer I'd say start
with the gki the glucose Ketone index oh
read it's a simple way to measure your
metabolic health and see how your
choices are affecting your mitochondria
we talked about that earlier yeah you
just measure your blood sugar and Ketone
levels and do a simple calculation right
there are affordable meters you can use
at home so you can track your gki and
experiment with different foods and
lifestyle changes see what moves you
closer to that Paleolithic Zone that
metabolic state where cancer cells can't
Thrive exactly so it's like a feedback
system exactly you can see how your
choices are affecting your health in
real time that's the idea that's cool
I'm sure there are people listening who
are thinking okay but what about
genetics what if I'm just predisposed to
cancer right that's a common question
yeah and it's important to acknowledge
that genetics do play a role but they're
not the whole story remember that
analogy Dr safer used about he talked
about jeans being like the blueprints
for a house oh yeah and the environment
being like the construction crew right
so you might have the blueprints for a
really sturdy house mhm but if the
construction crew cuts corners and uses
bad
materials the house isn't going to be as
strong as it could be I get it so even
if you have genes that make you more
susceptible to cancer you can still
create an environment in your body that
makes it less likely to develop exactly
that's where metabolic health comes in
by supporting your mitochondria you're
creating a cellular environment that's
less hospitable to cancer regardless of
your genes it's like stacking the deck
in your favor I like that you can't
control your genes but you can control
the environment they operate in exactly
and remember we're talking about complex
systems here it's not just about one
gene or one lifestyle Choice it's about
the cumulative effect of all your
choices over time so small consistent
changes add up up they do it's a
marathon not a Sprint exactly and it's
never too late to start making those
changes that's right this has been a
really eye opening conversation if
someone wants to learn more about Dr saf
Freed's work where should they start
well he wrote a book called cancer as a
metabolic disease it goes into a lot of
detail about his research okay it could
be a bit dense but it's a great resource
and for people who prefer something a
little easier to digest the interview
you sent was really good yeah I thought
so too he explained everything really
clearly he did and there are tons of
resources online right oh yeah
definitely his website lectures
interviews it's clear that he's very
passionate about this topic he is what
was it about his perspective that struck
you the most honestly I was really
impressed by his belief in the power of
Science and his dedication to helping
people with cancer he's not just a
researcher he's an advocate exactly he
wants to see this knowledge actually
help people that's what I found so
inspiring it reminds us that science
isn't just about facts and Figures it's
about human connection and compassion it
is and finding solutions to real world
problems absolutely so this metabolic
approach isn't just about changing your
diet or taking supplements it's about a
whole shift in mindset it's about taking
ownership of your health and making
informed choices I love that it's so
empowering it really is especially in a
world where we often feel powerless when
it comes to health issues yeah it's easy
to feel that way metabolic therapy gives
you a sense of hope an agency I agree
it's about recognizing that we have more
control than we think we do it's not
about guarantees or miracal cures but
about making choices that can improve
our odds we've covered a lot of ground
in this deep dive but before we move on
to the final part I want to go back to
something Dr safreed said that really
stuck with me he talked about how
success with metabolic therapy really
depends on the individual yeah it's not
something that's done to you it's
something you actively participate in
that's so important it requires
commitment discipline a willingness to
think differently about health and it's
not always easy yeah especially with all
the Temptations around us right it's
about playing the long game yes making
choices that support your future self
exactly and finding support is important
too it is connecting with people who
share your values and goals that can
make a big difference it really can this
whole conversation has really changed my
perspective on cancer it's not just
about bad luck or genes it's about the
choices we make and the environment we
create within our bodies I think that's
a really powerful way to look at it it's
about recognizing that connection
between our genes our lifestyle and our
environment and realizing that we have
more influence than we think absolutely
it's both humbling and empowering I
agree so as we move into the final part
of our Deep dive let's talk about some
practical steps and tools that we can
use to actually put all of this into
practice it's it's amazing how this
whole conversation about Dr sea freed
and metabolic therapy has really shown
how we tend to think about health
reactively not proactively that's true
yeah we wait till something goes wrong
and then we try to fix it exactly like
health is something separate something
we just deal with when it breaks down
instead of something we actively
cultivate yeah it's like we forget that
we have some control over it but what I
find exciting about metabolic therapy is
it flips that whole script right it's
about taking ownership understand
understanding what impacts your health
and then making choices that support
your body's own ability to heal it's
about being proactive exactly becoming
an active participant not a passive
patient I love that it's not about
denying genetics or rejecting
conventional medicine either it's just
recognizing that we have more power than
we think we do way more it's really
empowering but honestly it can also feel
a bit overwhelming there's so much
information so many things you could
change where do you even be SK you're
right it's a lot to process I think the
key is to start small don't try to do
everything at once pick one or two
things you can realistically change in
your daily routine okay keep it simple
what are some practical First Steps well
we've talked about diet a lot reducing
processed foods and sugary drinks is
huge focus on Whole Foods like fruits
vegetables nuts seeds lean protein that
alone can make a significant difference
and what about exercise how does that
fit in exercise is is so important for
mitochondrial Health it doesn't have to
be anything crazy just find something
you enjoy and can stick with walking
dancing swimming whatever works for you
even short bursts of activity throughout
the day can help Dr seed also mentioned
fasting yes fasting can be very powerful
but it's important to be careful with it
especially if you have any health
conditions definitely talk to your
doctor before making any big changes to
your eating patterns good advice always
best to check with your doctor before
trying anything drastic
what about supplements are there any
that can support mitochondrial function
there are a few that show promise but do
your research and make sure you're
getting high quality products right
supplements should be supplemental not a
replacement for a healthy lifestyle
exactly but even with all this
information it's still takes a lot of
commitment to make these changes and
stick with them it does how do you stay
motivated especially in a world that's
constantly tempting us with quick fixes
and instant gratification it's all about
changing your mindset f focus on the
long-term benefits imagine yourself
living a long healthy vibrant life every
Healthy Choice you make is an investment
in your future well-being playing the
long game with your health exactly and
don't underestimate the importance of
support connect with people who share
your values and goals join a community
find a mentor or talk to supportive
friends and family having that
encouragement can make a world of
difference that's so true you know this
whole Deep dive has completely changed
how I think about cancer it's not just
about bad luck or genes it's about the
choices we make the environment we
create within our own bodies it is yeah
it's about understanding that connection
between our genes our lifestyle and our
environment and realizing that we have
more influence over that connection than
we think absolutely it's both humbling
and empowering at the same time it
really is well this has been an
incredible Deep dive into the world of
metabolic therapy and its potential to
prevent and treat cancer this is clearly
a complex and evolving field but the
research is exciting it is and the
stories we've heard are truly inspiring
they are we encourage you to check out
the resources we mentioned and learn
more about this fascinating approach to
health remember knowledge is power
that's right and the more we understand
our bodies the better choices we can
make before we go I want to leave you
with a question to think about if you
could make one small change today to
support your metabolic Health what would
it be and how would that change create a
Ribble effect leading to a healthier
future for you and your loved ones
thanks for joining us on this deep dive
into metabolic therapy